---
title: "CS459 - Supplementary Notes"
url: "courses/cs459"
summary: "Privacy, Cryptography, Network, and Data Security - W25"
ShowToc: true
hidemeta: false
math: true
---

<style>
    .post-content {
        font-family: 'KaTeX_Main', serif;
        font-size: 25px;
        line-height: 1.6;
        color: #000000;
        background-color: #ffffff;
    }

    .post-content h1,
    .post-content h2,
    .post-content h3,
    .post-content h4,
    .post-content h5 {
        color: #000000;
        line-height: 1.2
    }

    .post-content b.h3notoc {
        font-size: 24px;
    }

    .post-content a {
        color: #0000FF
    }

    .katex-html {
        font-size: 16px;
    }
</style>

Privacy, Cryptography, Network, and Data Security <br>
_University of Waterloo_


<b class="h3notoc"> Course Description </b>

Introduction to privacy and security using cryptography and related techniques in networks, distributed systems, and data science. The course examines how data and metadata can be protected at rest, in transit, and during computation. For at-rest protection, specific topics include the basics of cryptography and relevant ethics/policy concepts. For in-transit protection, specific topics include network defenses, authentication, and secure and anonymous communication protocols. For during-computation protection, specific topics include data inference, differential privacy, homomorphic encryption, multi-party computations, and related protocols.

<br>
{{< notice warning "Educational Purposes Only" >}} 
Due to the nature of this content, I will emphasize that these notes are solely for educational purposes and __not__ to be used for illegal activities.
{{< /notice >}}

{{< notice note "General Disclaimers" >}}
- I am not responsible for any inaccuracies present in these notes.
- I will comply with any requests from UWaterloo to take these notes down.
- These notes are intended to **supplement** course materials rather than **replace** them.
- I tend to write rough notes throughout the term and then clean them up prior to each in-person assessment. I will try my best to finalize notes by those times.
{{< /notice >}}

{{< notice tip "Complementary Courses" >}}
- I am taking multiple courses alongside CS459 that are related to privacy
- For more in-depth information on how data is secured using cryptography, check out my [CO487 course notes](../co487)!
- For a discussion on the social implications of computing, especially concerning survelliance, check out my [CS492 course notes](../cs492)!
{{< /notice >}}

<br>

# Introduction to Privacy and Security

Here's one way to think about the relationship between privacy and security in the context of cybersecurity:

> Privacy refers to the control that one has over their personal information. One way to ensure privacy is to ensure security, which refers to protection from vulnerabilities that adversaries can exploit to execute a threat (data loss, data interception, etc.)

Note that by this definition, a computer system can be secure but not private. For example, an app (although secure) may utilize data from users without consent or their knowledge.

Privacy and threat analysis requires us to think about what is being protected, from who, and under what conditions.

<br>

# Data at Rest

{{< notice note "Overlap with CO487" >}}
There is a substantial overlap between this section of the course and much of CO487. Therefore, I have decided to only cover cryptographic concepts in depth on my CO487 course notes and assume knowledge of cryptography in these notes. Links to related sections in my CO487 course notes will be provided if an explanation is lacking by choice.
{{< /notice >}}

